## The story so far:
1. Groups are everywhere. \
    Examples:
    - $GL_n(\mathbb{R})$
    - $S_n$
    - $(\mathbb{Z}, +)$
    
    All of them are types of structure-preserving bijections.

2. Making new groups (similar to vector subspaces) \
    Example: $Hom(\mathbb{R}^n, \mathbb{R}^n)$ is a vector space; and $Aut(G)$ is the group of automorphisms of $G$. (_we'll get there_)

3. Subgroups of $\mathbb{Z}$ all have the form $b\mathbb{Z}$, where $b \in \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}$.

4. A cyclic subgroup is set of powers of one element.
    Example: 
    $$
    \begin{align*}
    \braket{ \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix}} &= \{ \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix}^n | \, n \in \mathbb{Z} \} \\
    &= \{ \begin{pmatrix} 1 & n \\ 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix}| \, n \in \mathbb{Z} \} \\
    & \subset GL_2(\mathbb{R})
    \end{align*}
    $$
    Which has infinite order, but in contrast,
    $$
    \text{Order } (\braket{ \begin{pmatrix} -1 & 0 \\ 0 & -1 \end{pmatrix}} ) = 2
    $$
    Since $\begin{pmatrix} -1 & 0 \\ 0 & -1 \end{pmatrix}^2 = I$,


## Morphisms
A **Morphism** is a map.

<br/>

## Isomorphisms
To make the subject clearer, let's start with an example.

1. $\quad G_1 = \{ \pm 1, \pm i \} \in \mathbb{C}^\times$

    The multiplication table for this group is:
    
    | $\times$ | $1$  | $i$   | $-1$ | $-i$  |
    |:--------:|:----:|:-----:|:----:|:-----:|
    | $1$      | $1$  | $i$   | $-1$ | $-i$  |
    | $i$      | $i$  | $-1$  | $-i$ | $1$   |
    | $-1$     | $-1$ | $-i$  | $1$  | $i$   |
    | $-i$     | $-i$ | $1$   | $i$  | $-1$  |


2. Subgroup $\braket{\rho} \subset S_4$, where $\rho = (1 \mapsto 2, \, 2 \mapsto 3, \, 3 \mapsto 4, \, 4 \mapsto 1)$

    Note that $\rho^2 \neq e, \rho$, and $\rho^3 \neq e, \rho, \rho^2$. \
    However, $\rho^4 = e$, therefore:

    The multiplication table for this group is:

    | $\times$ | $e$      | $\rho$   | $\rho^2$ | $\rho^3$ |
    |:--------:|:--------:|:--------:|:--------:|:--------:|
    | $e$      | $e$      | $\rho$   | $\rho^2$ | $\rho^3$ |
    | $\rho$   | $\rho$   | $\rho^2$ | $\rho^3$ | $e$      |
    | $\rho^2$ | $\rho^2$ | $\rho^3$ | $e$      | $\rho$   |
    | $\rho^3$ | $\rho^3$ | $e$      | $\rho$   | $\rho^2$ |

Comparing these two multiplcation tables, we can see that $G_1$ and $\braket{\rho}$ are in fact _"the same"_ group, because if we re-label $i$ as $\rho$, the multiplication tables become exactly identical.

### Definition
An **Isomorphism** $f: G_1 \mapsto G_2$ is a **bijection** between two groups $G_1$ with multiplication operator $\cdot$ and $G_2$ with multiplication operator $\times$, such that for all $x, y \in G_1$:
$$
f(x \cdot y) = f(x) \times f(y)
$$ 

In the previous example, $i^k \mapsto \rho^k \quad$ i.e. $f(i^k) = \rho^k$.

**Definition**: Two groups $G_1$ and $G_2$ are _isomorphic_ if there exists an isomorphism $f: G_1 \mapsto G_2$.

**Fact**: Any two cyclic groups of order $n$ are isomorphic.

_Proof of Fact_: \
Let $G_1 = \langle x_1 \rangle, G_2 = \langle x_2 \rangle$, then $f: G_1 \mapsto G_2 \, \coloneqq \, f(x_1^k) = x_2^k$ is a well-defined bijection, which clearly preserves multiplication.

**Note**: A particular **cyclic group** of order $n$, denoted as $C_n \,$, is given by the _span_ of the cycle
$$
\sigma_n = ( 1 \mapsto 2, \, 2 \mapsto 3, \, \dots \, , \, (n-1) \mapsto n, \, n \mapsto 1 )
$$
i.e. $C_n = \langle \sigma_n \rangle \subset S_n$

<br/>

**Example #1**: \
$G_1 = (\mathbb{R}, +)$ and $G_2 = (\mathbb{R}_{\gt 0}, \times)$ are isomorphic.

Where $f: G_1 \mapsto G_2 := f(x) =e^x$ is an isomorphism, the inverse $f^{-1}(x) = ln(x)$ exists and $e^{x+y} = e^x \times e^y$.

(Basically, this is converting multiplication to addition, and vice versa using exponentials and logarithms.)

<br/>

**Example #2**: \
We can write the Klein 4-group (sometimes shown as $V$) in the following two ways:

1. 
$$
\begin{align*}
G_1 = \{ \quad
&e, \\ 
&\tau_1 : (1 \mapsto 2, \, 2 \mapsto 1, \, 3 \mapsto 4, \, 4 \mapsto 3) \\ 
&\tau_2 : (1 \mapsto 3, \, 3 \mapsto 1, \, 2 \mapsto 4, \, 4 \mapsto 2) \\ 
&\tau_3 : (1 \mapsto 4, \, 4 \mapsto 1, \, 2 \mapsto 3, \, 3 \mapsto 2) = \tau_1 \tau_2 = \tau_2 \tau_1 \\ 
\} \subset S_4
\end{align*} \\
$$

The (row-coming-from-left) multiplication table is:

| $\times$         | $e$              | $\tau_1$         | $\tau_2$         | $\tau_1 \tau_2$  |
|:----------------:|:----------------:|:----------------:|:----------------:|:----------------:|
| $e$              | $e$              | $\tau_1$         | $\tau_2$         | $\tau_1 \tau_2$  |
| $\tau_1$         | $\tau_1$         | $e$              | $\tau_1 \tau_2$  | $\tau_2$         |
| $\tau_2$         | $\tau_2$         | $\tau_1 \tau_2$  | $e$              | $\tau_1$         |
| $\tau_1 \tau_2$  | $\tau_1 \tau_2$  | $\tau_2$         | $\tau_1$         | $e$              |

Note that $\tau_1, \tau_2$ commute.

2. 
$$
\begin{align*}
G_2 &= \{ I, \begin{pmatrix} -1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix}, \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ 0 & -1 \end{pmatrix}, -I \} \\
& \subset GL_2(\mathbb{R})
\end{align*}
$$

Consider $f: G_1 \mapsto G_2$, an isomorphism whose mappings are given by:
$$
\begin{align*} 
\tau_1 &\mapsto \begin{pmatrix} -1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix} \\
\, \\
\tau_2 &\mapsto \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ 0 & -1 \end{pmatrix} \\
\, \\
\tau_1 \tau_2 &\mapsto -I \\
\, \\
e &\mapsto I
\end{align*}
$$

**Question**: Is $V$ isomorphic to $C_4$? \
Let's frame the question in an interesting way: \
Is 
$$
V = G_2 = \{ I, \begin{pmatrix} -1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix}, \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ 0 & -1 \end{pmatrix}, -I \}
$$
isomorphic to
$$
C_4 = \{ 1, i, -i, -1 \} \,
$$ 
? 

**Answer**: No! We don't have any element of order $4$ in $V$. \
(They all have order $2$, meaning that they are their own inverses.)

e.g. $\begin{pmatrix} -1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix}^2 = I \neq i^2 = -1$

Some properties of isomorphic groups:

1. $|G_1| = |G_2|$ (Same number of elements)
2. $G_1$ Abelian $\iff G_2$ Abelian.
3. $G_1, G_2$ have the same number of elements of **every order**.

<br/>

## Automorphims
An **Automorphism** is a bijective map from an object to itself.

Given $G$, we can construct $Aut(G)$, the _automorphism group_ of $G$. \
i.e. The set of all isomorphisms from $G$ to itself. \
i.e. The "symmetries" of "structure-preserving maps" of $G$.

$Aut(G)$ is a group itself!

- Certainly a composition of isomorphisms is an isomorphism.
- Identity automorphism is the identity map of $G$.
- We can easily verfiy that the inverse of an automorphism is also an automorphism.

## Homomorphisms

Example: **The determinant!**

$$
det := GL_n(\mathbb{R}) \mapsto \mathbb{R}^{\times} \\
\, \\
\mathbb{R}^{\times} = ( \mathbb{R} - \{0\}, \times )
$$

$$
det(AB) = det(A) \times det(B)
$$
- It's not 1-to-1.
- $\mathbb{R}^{\times}$ is Abelian, but $GL_n(\mathbb{R})$ isn't.
- Determinant is not an isomorphism.

### Definition:
Homorphisms are **maps** $f: G_1 \mapsto G_2$ such that **only** $f(x.y) = f(x) \times f(y)$. \
(Not necessarily a bijection [1-to-1] anymore!)

**Example**: \
Any isomorphism.

**Example**: \
The trivial homorphism $f: G_1 \mapsto G_2 \, | \, f(x) = e \quad \forall x \in G$.

**Example**: \
"Expansion":  $S_n \mapsto S_m, \quad n < m$. \
(Same thing we did with $S_3 \mapsto S_n$ in the previous lecture.)

**Example**: 
$$
f: \mathbb{Z} \mapsto S_2 \\ 
f(evens) = e, \\
f(odds) = \tau
$$ 
is clearly a homomorphism. \
$even \times even = even \, (e), \quad odd \times odd = odd \, (\tau), \quad even \times odd = odd \, (\tau)$.

**Note**: \
Any homomorphism $f: G_1 \mapsto G_2$ has the property that $f(e) = e'$.

**Proof**: 
$$
\begin{align*} 
f(e) &= f(ee) = f(e) \times f(e) \\
\, \\
\Rightarrow f(e)^{-1} \times f(e) &= f(e)^{-1} \times f(e) \times f(e) \\
&= e' = f(e)
\end{align*}
$$

(We know that anything in $G_2$ times its inverse is the identity.)

## Images
For a map $f: G_1 \mapsto G_2$, we can define the image of $f$ as the set of all elements $f(x)$ in $G_2$. \
i.e. 
$$
Image(f) = \{ f(x) \in G_2 \mid x \in G_1 \}
$$
