## Equivalence Relations in Set Theory

We partition a set $S$ into disjoint subsets $S_i$ whose union is $S$.

For $a, b \in S$, we say $a \sim b$ if $a$ and $b$ are in the same subset $S_i$.

This is called an **Equivalence Relation** and the subsets $S_i$ are called **Equivalence Classes**.

The equivalence relation has three properties:

1. Reflexivity: $a \sim a$
2. Symmetry: $a \sim b \Rightarrow b \sim a$.
3. Transitivity: $a \sim b, \, b \sim c \Rightarrow a \sim c$.

There exists a map which does the following:

$$
S \mapsto \bar{S} = \{ \text{ equivalence classes in } S \}
$$

Which could also be described as:

$$
a \mapsto \bar{a} = \{ \text{the equivalence class containing } a \}
$$

(Assuming $S$ is already partitioned)

Conversely, if we have a map $f: S \mapsto T$, this gives an equivalence relation (partition) on $S$:

$$
a \sim b \iff f(a) = f(b) 
$$

**Example**: \
The real line $S = \mathbb{R}$ maps to the complex circle with of norm $1$, aka $T = \mathbb{C}^1$ by the map $f(x) = e^{2 \pi i x}$.

In this case, $f^{-1}(1) = \mathbb{Z}$, so the integers are an equivalence class.

The _set of equivalence classes_ in this case is the interval $[0, 1)$, because every point on the circle is a point on the interval.

Notice that this is a homomorphism on groups, because $f$ maps $(\mathbb{R}, +) \mapsto (\mathbb{C}^1, \times)$, and we can see that $f(a + b) = f(a) \times f(b)$.

---

**Sidenote**:

Two properties of the exponential function are what make it amazing:

1. Being a homomorphism from the additive group of numbers to the multiplicative group of numbers. (as seen above)
2. Being a solution to $f'(x) = af(x)$.

Note that both the real line and the complex circle above aren't just sets, they have a topology to them. (You can talk about when two points are in $\epsilon$-neighborhood of each other)

You can see that this exponential mapping not only preserves group structure, it sends close points from the real line to close points on the circle. (aka preserves the topological structure)

This is called a **Homomorphism of Lie groups**.

The fact that the study of group homomorphisms in the context of continuous groups is infinitely related to the solution of differential equations. \
(look up the **Lie Group-Lie Algebra Correspondence**.)

---

Maps on sets are fairly complicated (why?), so we'll look at maps on groups which are much nicer.

## Cosets and Group Homomorphisms

Suppose $f: G \mapsto G'$ is a group homomorphism. 

Let $H \triangleleft G$ be the _kernel_ of $f$. \
Then we get an equivalence relation on $G$ where $H$ is one of the equivalence classes.

Namely, any time we have a group homomorphism $f$ on a group $G$, we get a partition of $G$ into pieces, and one of the pieces is the kernel of $f$.

Why? \
Because $H = f^{-1}(e') = \{ a \in G : f(a) = f(e) = e' \}$.

**Proposition**: \
The other equivalence classes have the form:

$$
a \cdot H = \{ a \cdot h : h \in H \} \quad \exists a \in G
$$

This is called a **left coset** of $H$ in $G$. \
(Because we multiplied $a$ on the left)

**Proof**: \
Say $f(a) = f(b)$, (i.e. $a \sim b$) \
Then,

$$
\begin{align*} 
f(a^{-1} b) 
&= f(a^{-1}) \times f(b) \\
&= f(a)^{-1} \times f(b) \\
&= f(b)^{-1} \times f(b) \\
&= e'
\end{align*}
$$

Which would mean that $h = a^{-1}b \in H$, therefore $b = ah$. \
We can see that this holds true for all $h$ in $H$. i.e. $\forall h \in H, f(a) = f(ah) = f(b)$. 

So if I have an element _equivalent_ to $a$, it lies inside the $a \cdot H$ set. \
Conversely, if I have an element in $a \cdot H$, it's _equivalent_ to $a$. \
Because for all the elements in that set, $f(b) = f(a \cdot h) = f(a) \times f(h) = f(a) \times e' = f(a)$.

So the equivalence classes of homomorphisms of groups are precisely the different left cosets of the kernel.

Now, what's so good about that?

**Fact**: The map $h \mapsto a \cdot h$ is a bijection of sets from $H \mapsto a \cdot H$. \
(It's 1-to-1, because if $ah = ah'$, then $h = h'$)

In particular, if $|H|$ is finite, then $|a \cdot H| = |H|$ for all $a \in G$.

In summary, for a _group homomorphism_, the equivalence classes are of the form $aH$, where $H = Kernel(f)$ and all have the **same size**. \
(Because they're in bijection to each other)

**Note**: \
This is not the case for a map on a _set_. 
For example, if we have the map:

$$
f : S = \{ S_1, S_2, S_3 \} \mapsto T = \{ T_1, T_2 \} \\
\, \\
f = \begin{cases}
S_1 \mapsto T_1 \\
S_2 \mapsto T_2 \\
S_3 \mapsto T_2 \\
\end{cases}
$$

We have two equivalence classes of different sizes (!), namely $\{ S_1 \}$ and $\{ S_2, S_3 \}$.

<br/>

**Corollary**: \
Assume $|G|$ is finite, and $f: G \mapsto G'$ is a homomorphism with Kernel $H$. \
Then, 
$$
|G| = |H| \times |Image(f)|
$$

(All cosets have the same size and the number of cosets is the size of the image)

This is very similar to the Linear Algebra theorem that says: \
If $T: V \mapsto W$ is a linear map, then $dim(V) = dim(Kernel(T)) + dim(Image(T))$.

**Example**: \
$|S_n| = n!$ ; for $n \ge 2$, $|A_n| = \frac{n!}{2}$

_Proof_: \
$f : S_n \mapsto \braket{\pm 1}$ is surjective for $n \ge 2$ with Kernel $A_n$. \
($f$ is the sign of the permutation, and we see that the size of the image is $2$)

Similarly, we can see that $|A_3| = 3!/2 = 3, |A_4| = 4!/2 = 12, |A_5| = 5!/2 = 60$ and so on. 

<br/>

Now let's back up a second. Every time we prove something, we should ask ourselves: \
"Have we used all the hypotheses?"

We can see that nowhere in here we have used the fact that $H$ is a _normal_ subgroup of $G$. \
We have only used  the fact that $H$ is a subgroup of $G$.

**More General Fact**: \
Let  $H \sub G$ (not necessarily normal, not necessarily comes from a homomorphism) be a subgroup of $G$. \
We define the (left) coset of $a \in G$ by $a \cdot H = \{a \cdot h : h \in H \}$. \
Then these subsets are disjoint and partition $G$. \
Furthermore, they are in set-theoretic bijection with $H$.

To understand the above statement better, let's consider cosets more closely.

## Two properties of Cosets

1. Disjoint or Identical: Two left cosets of a subgroup $H \in G$ are either disjoint or identical. That is, for any two elements $g$ and $g′$ in $G$, their corresponding left cosets $g \cdot H$ and $g′ \cdot H$ either have no elements in common or are exactly the same set.

2. Equivalent Cosets: The left cosets $g \cdot H$ and $g′ \cdot H$ are identical if and only if $g^{−1}g′ \in H$. In other words, two cosets are the same if the elements used to generate them are related by an element of the subgroup.

### Example
Consider the group $(\mathbb{Z}, +)$ and its subgroup $2 \mathbb{Z}$ (even integers). \
The left cosets of $2 \mathbb{Z}$ are $2 \mathbb{Z} + 0 = 2\mathbb{Z}$ itself and $2\mathbb{Z} + 1$ (the set of odd integers). \
These two cosets are disjoint and together they cover all of $Z$. \
(Remember that the product operation in this case is addition)

## Lagrange's Theorem

We define the **index** of $H$ in $G$ to be the number of distinct cosets of $H$ in $G$. \
(which may be infinite, and is the same as the number of equivalence classes) \
And we denote it by $[G:H]$.

**More General Corollary**: \
If $G$ is finite, and $H \sub G$, then $|G| = |H| \times [G:H]$.

This gets us to the **Lagrange's theorem**:

If $G$ is a finite group, and $g \in G$, then _the order of $g$ divides $|G|$_.

Remember that the _order_ of $g$ is the smallest $n$ such that $g^m = e$.

**Proof**: \
Let $H = \braket{g} = \braket{e, g, g^2, \dots, g^{m-1}}$, we can easily see that $|H| = m = Order(g)$. \
And since the order of a subgroup of any finite group divides the order of the group (as seen in the more general corollary), we get that $m$ divides $|G|$.

Funny thing to note, here $g^{m-1} = g^{-1}$, as $g \cdot g^{m-1} = e$.

Now this gives us a lot of fun!

**Corollary of Lagrange's theorem**: \
Let $G$ be a finite group with $|G| = p$ being a prime number. \
(This is the beginning of the interaction of group theory with number theory) \
_Then $G$ is cyclic, and it is generated by any $e \neq g \in G$._ \
Furthermore, the only subgroups of $G$ are $\{ e \}$ and $G$ itself.

**Proof**: \
Just use the $|G| = |H| \times [G:H]$ formula. \
Since $|G| = p$ is prime, we get that $|H| = 1$ or $|H| = p$. \
If $g \neq e$, then its generated subgroup $H = \braket{g}$ should be equal to $G$. \
(The only element which has order $1$ is $e$)

Can we show that this is a strong result by exhibiting non-cyclic groups of order $p^2$ or $pq$? 

(For example, $G$ = Klein 4-group, $|G| = 4$ and is non-cyclic. \
$G = S_3$, we know that $|G| = 6$ and is non-cyclic.)

Yes we can show that, but **all groups of order $p^2$ are Abelian**.

<br/>

**Definition**: \
A group $G$ is called **simple** if its only normal subgroups are $\{ e \}$ and $G$ itself.

For example:
1. Any group of prime order is simple. (These are the only Abelian simple groups)
2. $A_n$ is simple for $n \ge 5$.
3. Any finite, non-Abelian simple group has even order. (This is a theorem of Feit-Thompson)


----

