### General Linear Group
$GL_n(\mathbb{R}) =$ all _invertible_ $n \times n$ matrices $A$ with entries $a_{ij} \in \mathbb{R}$ \
$GL_n(\mathbb{C}) =$ all _invertible_ $n \times n$ matrices $A$ with entries $a_{ij} \in \mathbb{C}$ \
$GL_n(\mathbb{Q}) =$ all _invertible_ $n \times n$ matrices $A$ with entries $a_{ij} \in \mathbb{Q}$ 

All of these are groups $G$, meaning they are:
- A set with a product structure:
    $$a, b \in G \, \Rightarrow \ a \cdot b \in G$$
- Associative:
    $$a \cdot (b \cdot c) = (a \cdot b) \cdot c$$
- Including an identity element $e$:
    $$a \cdot e = e \cdot a = a$$
- Including an inverse for each element:
    $$a \cdot a^{-1} = a^{-1} \cdot a = e$$



## Subgroups
Precisely, a group $H$ is a **subgroup** of $G$ (denoted as $H \subset G$) if it is:
1. A subset closed under the appropriate (same?) group operation,
2. Contains the identity element,
3. Has inverses for each element.

---

## Symmetry (Ur) Group
The **Ur group** on a _set_ $T$:
$$
Sym(T) = \{\text{All bijections } a: T \rightarrow T \}
$$
Where **composition** is the group operation:
$$ (a \cdot b) (t) = a(b(t))$$
The **identity** is the bijection which maps each element to itself. \
And inverses exist because the elements are _bijections_.

### Why do we talk about the _Ur Group_?
Because many groups arise as subgroups of groups of form $Sym(T)$. \
e.g. $GL_n(\mathbb{R}) \subset Sym(\mathbb{R}^n)$ 

Why? \
Because $Sym(\mathbb{R}^n)$ is the group of all bijections from $\mathbb{R}^n$ to $\mathbb{R}^n$, but $GL_n(\mathbb{R})$ is the subgroup of all _invertible_ bijections from $\mathbb{R}^n$ to $\mathbb{R}^n$. \
For example, there could be a bijection which maps something to $\vec{0}$ and maps $\vec{0}$ to something else, which is not invertible.

---

**Sidenote**: Permutation matrices:

For example, the permutation matrix $P_\pi$ corresponding to the permutation $\pi = 
\begin{pmatrix} 
1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 5 \\
\downarrow & \downarrow & \downarrow & \downarrow & \downarrow 
\\ 1 & 4 & 2 & 5 & 3 
\end{pmatrix}$ is the matrix:

$$
P_\pi = 
\begin{pmatrix} 
\textbf{e}_{\pi(1)} \\
\textbf{e}_{\pi(2)} \\
\textbf{e}_{\pi(3)} \\
\textbf{e}_{\pi(4)} \\
\textbf{e}_{\pi(5)}
\end{pmatrix} = 
\begin{pmatrix} 
\textbf{e}_1 \\
\textbf{e}_4 \\
\textbf{e}_2 \\
\textbf{e}_5 \\
\textbf{e}_3
\end{pmatrix} = 
\begin{pmatrix} 
1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\
0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 
\end{pmatrix}
$$

(Rows!)

Where $\textbf{e}_i$ is the $i$-th basis vector.

Also, using the parallelogram mental picture from 3B1B (Artin's LA chapter), we can see that swapping the rows or columns of a matrix doesn't change the absolute value of determinant. (It basically stretches/shrinks the parallelogram in a different direction when you swap), and we can also see that we can swap the rows of a permutation matrix to get $I$, whose determinant is 1. Therefore, the determinant of a permutation matrix is either $1$ or $-1$. (Which is non-$0$, so it's invertible and therefore a group element)

---

$$
\begin{align*}
S_n :&= Sym \{1, 2, \, \dots, \, n\} \\
&= \text{"Permutation group on } n \text{ letters"} \\
&= \text{"Symmetry group on } n \text{ letters"}
\end{align*}$$

This is a **finite** group of size $n! \,$ . \
i.e. $|S_n| = n! \,$.

The different variations of it are:
$$
S_1 = \{e\} \\

\, \\

\begin{align*}
S_2 = \{ \quad
&e: (1 \mapsto 1, \, 2 \mapsto 2) \\
&\tau : (1 \mapsto 2, \, 2 \mapsto 1) \\ \} 
\end{align*} \\
$$

Where the multiplication table becomes:

| $\cdot$       | $e$    | $\tau$ |
|---      |---     | --     |
| $e$     | $e$    | $\tau$ |
| $\tau$  | $\tau$ | $e$    |

in particular, $\tau^{-1} = \tau$.

**Recall** that if for all $a, b \in G$, we have $ab = ba$, then we say the group is **Abelian** or **Commutative**.

So, $S_2$ is Abelian.

$$
\begin{align*}
S_3 = \{ \quad
&e, \\ 
&\tau    : (1 \mapsto 2, \, 2 \mapsto 1, \, 3 \mapsto 3) \\
&\tau'   : (1 \mapsto 1, \, 2 \mapsto 3, \, 3 \mapsto 2) \\
&\tau''  : (1 \mapsto 3, \, 2 \mapsto 2, \, 3 \mapsto 1) \\
&\sigma  : (1 \mapsto 2, \, 2 \mapsto 3, \, 3 \mapsto 1) \\
&\sigma' : (1 \mapsto 3, \, 2 \mapsto 1, \, r \mapsto 2) \\
\} 
\end{align*} \\
$$

The $\tau$ is called a **Transposition**, meaning it only changes $2$ elements of $T$.

**Note**: 
Tranpositions are always their own inverse.

_Question_: 
Is $S_3$ Abelian?

_Answer_:
No! Because $\tau \sigma \neq \sigma \tau$ (you can check for yourself!) \
Note that $\tau^{-1} = \tau, \quad \sigma^{-1} = \sigma'$
(applies for $\tau', \tau''$ as well.)


**Corollary**:
The group $S_n$ is _non-Abelian_ for all $n \geq 3$. \
_Proof_: $S_3 \subset S_n$. \
Basically, every element of $S_3$ can be thought of an element of $S_n$, assuming that the other letters $4, 5, \dots$ are mapped to themselves.

**Note**:
For $k \leq n$, $S_k \subset S_n$.

<hr/>

### Example #1
_Question_:
What is the subgroup of $GL_2(\mathbb{R})$ which _stabilizes_ the line $y=0$? \
(Meaning that every vector on the line $y=0$ will stay on that line after the tranformation)

**Note** that it's immediately clear that this is a subgroup, because composites stabilize, the identity stabilizes, and the inverses stabilize.

_Answer_: 
$$
H = \{\begin{pmatrix} a & b \\ 0 & d \end{pmatrix} : \, d \neq 0 \}
$$

Because:

$$
\begin{pmatrix} a & b \\ c & d \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} x \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} ax \\ cx \end{pmatrix} = \lambda \begin{pmatrix} x \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} \\
\, \\
\Rightarrow c = 0 \\
\, \\
GL_n \text{ invertible} \Rightarrow ad \neq 0
$$

[In Quantum terms, this is a matrix whose $| 1\rangle \langle 0|$ term $=0$]

Some trivial examples of subgroups of a group $G$ are:
$$
\{e\} \text{ is a subgroup for all groups } G
$$

<hr/>

### Example #2
_Proposition_:
The subgroups of $G = (\mathbb{Z}, +)$ are precisely given by $(b \mathbb{Z}, +)$ for $b$ a fixed integer.

e.g: \
$b=0$ gives the subgroup $(0, +)$. \
$b=1$ gives subgroup $H = G$.

_Proof_:
I feel like the proof is rather obvious, so I won't go through it here, just remember that if we have a set and we want to check whether it's a subgroup of $(\mathbb{Z}, +)$, we can use the Eucledian algorithm to find the smallest positive integer $b$ in there, then we can see if everything else is a multiple of that.


## Generators
A _generating set_ of a group is a subset of the group set such that every element of the group can be expressed as a combination (under the group operation) of finitely many elements of the subset and their inverses. \
Let $G$ be any group with $g \in G$, then we can define the **Generator** of $G$ as:
$$
\begin{align*}
H &= \, \, \braket{g} \\
&= \{e, \, g, \, g^{-1}, \, g^2, \, g^{-2}, ... \} \\
&= \{g^m : m \in \mathbb{Z} \}
\end{align*}
$$
Which is the cyclic subgroup generated by $g$, which is also the smallest subgroup containing $g$.

Note that $g^m \cdot g^n = g^{m+n} \,$ for all $m, n \in \mathbb{Z}$. \
Similarly, $(g^m)^{-1} = g^{-m}$.

**Caveat**: We have to be careful not to think that these element need to be distinct. \
For example, in $S_2 \,$, $\braket{\tau} = \{e, \tau \}$; since $\tau^2 = e$.

---
**Sidenote**: There's a more common notation (called the cyclic notation) for permutations. 

For example, the notation $(123)$ means that $1 \mapsto 2, \, 2 \mapsto 3, \, 3 \mapsto 1$. 

If we don't write down a number, it means that it maps to itself; so $(12)$ means $1 \mapsto 2, \, 2 \mapsto 1, \, 3 \mapsto 3$.

But in general, a permutation can be broken down into a product of disjoint cycles, for example:

$(123)(45)$  indicates two separate actions:
1. The elements 1, 2, and 3 are permuted among themselves in a 3-cycle as described above.
2. At the same time, the elements 4 and 5 are swapped, which is a 2-cycle or transposition.

---

Using the sidenote, we can see that a <ins> generating set </ins> of $S_3$ is $\{ \tau = (12) \, , \sigma = (123) \}$.

#### Order of a group
If $g^m = e$ and $m$ is the smallest such power, we say $m$ is the _order_ of the generator $g$. \
If no power of $g$ is $e$, then we say that $g$ has infinite order.


