
# Subgroups
Precisely, a group $H$ is a **subgroup** of $G$ (denoted as $H \subset G$) if it is:
1. A subset closed under the same group operation,
2. Contains the identity element of $G$, and
3. Has inverses for each element.

Beyond the identity element, subgroups can share other elements as well. \
Consider, for example, the group of integers under addition, $(\mathbb{Z}, +)$. \
The set of multiples of $2$ and the set of multiples of $4$ are both subgroups of $Z$. \
These two subgroups share not only the identity element $0$ but also every multiple of $4$ (which are also multiples of $2$).

### Example #1
_Question_:
What is the subgroup of $GL_2(\mathbb{R})$ which _stabilizes_ the line $y=0$? \
(Meaning that every vector on the line $y=0$ will stay on that line after the tranformation)

**Note** that it's immediately clear that this is a subgroup, because composites stabilize, the identity stabilizes, and the inverses stabilize.

_Answer_: 
$$
H = \{\begin{pmatrix} a & b \\ 0 & d \end{pmatrix} : \, d \neq 0 \}
$$

Because:

$$
\begin{pmatrix} a & b \\ c & d \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} x \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} ax \\ cx \end{pmatrix} = \lambda \begin{pmatrix} x \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} \\
\, \\
\Rightarrow c = 0 \\
\, \\
GL_n \text{ invertible} \Rightarrow ad \neq 0
$$

[In Quantum terms, this is a matrix whose $| 1\rangle \langle 0|$ term $=0$]

Some trivial examples of subgroups of a group $G$ are:
$$
\{e\} \text{ is a subgroup for all groups } G
$$

<hr/>

### Example #2
_Proposition_:
The subgroups of $G = (\mathbb{Z}, +)$ are precisely given by $(b \mathbb{Z}, +)$ for $b$ a fixed integer.

e.g: \
$b=0$ gives the subgroup $(0, +)$. \
$b=1$ gives subgroup $H = G$.

_Proof_:
I feel like the proof is rather obvious, so I won't go through it here, just remember that if we have a set and we want to check whether it's a subgroup of $(\mathbb{Z}, +)$, we can use the Eucledian algorithm to find the smallest positive integer $b$ in there, then we can see if everything else is a multiple of that.


# Generators
A _generating set_ of a group is a subset of the group set such that every element of the group can be expressed as a combination (under the group operation) of finitely many elements of the subset and their inverses. 

To illustrate, \
Let $G$ be any group with an element $g \in G$, then we can define the **Generator** of $G$ as:
$$
\begin{align*}
H &= \, \, \braket{g} \\
&= \{e, \, g, \, g^{-1}, \, g^2, \, g^{-2}, ... \} \\
&= \{g^m : m \in \mathbb{Z} \}
\end{align*}
$$
Which is the cyclic subgroup generated by $g$, which is also the smallest subgroup containing $g$.

Note that $g^m \cdot g^n = g^{m+n} \,$ for all $m, n \in \mathbb{Z}$. \
Similarly, $(g^m)^{-1} = g^{-m}$.

More generally, \
For a set $S \subset G$, we say that $S$ generates the group $G$ if every element $h \in G$ can be expressed as a finite combination of elements from $S$ and their inverses. Formally, the subgroup generated by $S$, denoted by $\braket{S}$, is defined as:

$$
\braket{S} = \{ h \in G \, | \, h = s_{1}^{\epsilon_1} s_{2}^{\epsilon_2} \, \cdots \, s_{k}^{\epsilon_k} \} \newline \text{ where }s_i \in S, \, \epsilon_i \in \{+1, -1\}.
$$

**Caveat**: We have to be careful not to think that these element need to be distinct. \
For example, in $S_2 \,$, $\braket{\tau} = \{e, \tau \}$; since $\tau^2 = e$.

---
**Sidenote**: There's a more common notation (called the **cyclic notation**) for permutations. 

For example, the notation $(123)$ means that $1 \mapsto 2, \, 2 \mapsto 3, \, 3 \mapsto 1$. The cyclic part comes from the fact that $(123) = (231) = (312)$.

If we don't write down a number, it means that it maps to itself; so $(12)$ is basically $(12)(3)$, meaning that $1 \mapsto 2, \, 2 \mapsto 1, \, 3 \mapsto 3$.

But in general, a permutation can be broken down into a product of disjoint cycles, for example:

$(123)(45)$  indicates two separate actions:
1. The elements 1, 2, and 3 are permuted among themselves in a 3-cycle as described above.
2. At the same time, the elements 4 and 5 are swapped, which is a 2-cycle or transposition.

---

Using the sidenote, we can see that a <ins> generating set </ins> of $S_3$ is $\{ \tau = (12) \, , \sigma = (123) \}$.

#### Order of a group
If $g^m = e$ and $m$ is the smallest such power, we say $m$ is the _order_ of the generator $g$. \
If no power of $g$ is $e$, then we say that $g$ has infinite order.