# Symmetry Group - $Sym(T)$

This is the most "general" example of a group. \
Suppose $T$ is a set, then 
$$
Sym(T) = \{ \text{all bijections } g: T \rightarrow T \} 
$$
is a group under the **composition** of transformations. \
The **identity** is the bijection which maps each element to itself. \
Remember that a _bijection_ is a **1-to-1, onto** map, which means that this is a set of all 1-to-1 and onto maps whose domain and range are both $T$. so inverses exist.

## Properties
- _Identity_: $e := x \mapsto x$ is the identity element.
- _Inverses_ exist by bijectivity.
- _Associativity_: for all $t \in T; \, a, b \in Sym(t)$, this holds: $(a \cdot b) (t) = a(b(t))$

In some sense, this is the most general group, because groups arise as bijections of a set which preserve the structure (Symmetries) of a set.

Many groups arise as subgroups of groups of form $Sym(T)$. \
e.g. $GL_n(\mathbb{R}) \subset Sym(\mathbb{R}^n)$ 

Why? \
Because $Sym(\mathbb{R}^n)$ is the group of all bijections from $\mathbb{R}^n$ to $\mathbb{R}^n$, but $GL_n(\mathbb{R})$ is the subgroup of all _invertible_ bijections from $\mathbb{R}^n$ to $\mathbb{R}^n$. \
For example, there could be a bijection which maps something to the null matrix and maps the null matrix to something else, which is not invertible. (because you can't multiply the null matrix by anything to get the identity matrix)

Another example:
$$
T_n = \{1, \, \dots \, , n\} \text{ is a set.} \\
S_n := Sym(T_n) \\
$$
$S_n$ is the set of **all** bijections on $T_n$ and a finite group of size $n!$ .

Interestingly, $S_3$ is **not Abelian**.

---

**Sidenote**: Permutation matrices:

For example, the permutation matrix $P_\pi$ corresponding to the permutation $\pi = 
\begin{pmatrix} 
1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 5 \\
\downarrow & \downarrow & \downarrow & \downarrow & \downarrow 
\\ 1 & 4 & 2 & 5 & 3 
\end{pmatrix}$ is the matrix:

$$
P_\pi = 
\begin{pmatrix} 
\textbf{e}_{\pi(1)} \\
\textbf{e}_{\pi(2)} \\
\textbf{e}_{\pi(3)} \\
\textbf{e}_{\pi(4)} \\
\textbf{e}_{\pi(5)}
\end{pmatrix} = 
\begin{pmatrix} 
\textbf{e}_1 \\
\textbf{e}_4 \\
\textbf{e}_2 \\
\textbf{e}_5 \\
\textbf{e}_3
\end{pmatrix} = 
\begin{pmatrix} 
1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\
0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 
\end{pmatrix}
$$

(Rows!)

Where $\textbf{e}_i$ is the $i$-th basis vector.

Also, using the parallelogram mental picture from 3B1B (Artin's LA chapter), we can see that swapping the rows or columns of a matrix doesn't change the absolute value of determinant. (It basically stretches/shrinks the parallelogram in a different direction when you swap), and we can also see that we can swap the rows of a permutation matrix to get $I$, whose determinant is 1. Therefore, the determinant of a permutation matrix is either $1$ or $-1$. (Which is non-$0$, so it's invertible and therefore a group element)

---

An example of the Symmetry group is:

$$
\begin{align*}
S_n :&= Sym \{1, 2, \, \dots, \, n\} \\
&= \text{"Permutation group on } n \text{ letters"} \\
&= \text{"Symmetry group on } n \text{ letters"}
\end{align*}$$

This is a **finite** group of size $n! \,$ . \
i.e. $|S_n| = n! \,$.

The different variations of it are:
$$
S_1 = \{e\} \\

\, \\

\begin{align*}
S_2 = \{ \quad
&e: (1 \mapsto 1, \, 2 \mapsto 2) \\
&\tau : (1 \mapsto 2, \, 2 \mapsto 1) \\ \} 
\end{align*} \\
$$

Where the multiplication table becomes:

| $\cdot$       | $e$    | $\tau$ |
|---      |---     | --     |
| $e$     | $e$    | $\tau$ |
| $\tau$  | $\tau$ | $e$    |

in particular, $\tau^{-1} = \tau$.

**Recall** that if for all $a, b \in G$, we have $ab = ba$, then we say the group is **Abelian** or **Commutative**.

So, $S_2$ is Abelian.

$$
\begin{align*}
S_3 = \{ \quad
&e, \\ 
&\tau    : (1 \mapsto 2, \, 2 \mapsto 1, \, 3 \mapsto 3) \\
&\tau'   : (1 \mapsto 1, \, 2 \mapsto 3, \, 3 \mapsto 2) \\
&\tau''  : (1 \mapsto 3, \, 2 \mapsto 2, \, 3 \mapsto 1) \\
&\sigma  : (1 \mapsto 2, \, 2 \mapsto 3, \, 3 \mapsto 1) \\
&\sigma' : (1 \mapsto 3, \, 2 \mapsto 1, \, r \mapsto 2) \\
\} 
\end{align*} \\
$$

The $\tau$ is called a **Transposition**, meaning it only changes $2$ elements of $T$.

**Note**: 
Tranpositions are always their own inverse.

_Question_: 
Is $S_3$ Abelian?

_Answer_:
No! Because $\tau \sigma \neq \sigma \tau$ (you can check for yourself!) \
Note that $\tau^{-1} = \tau, \quad \sigma^{-1} = \sigma'$
(applies for $\tau', \tau''$ as well.)


**Corollary**:
The group $S_n$ is _non-Abelian_ for all $n \geq 3$. \
_Proof_: $S_3 \subset S_n$. \
Basically, every element of $S_3$ can be thought of an element of $S_n$, assuming that the other letters $4, 5, \dots$ are mapped to themselves.

**Note**:
For $k \leq n$, $S_k \subset S_n$.
