## Equivalence Relations in Set Theory

We partition a set $S$ into disjoint subsets $S_i$ whose union is $S$.

For $a, b \in S$, we say $a \sim b$ if $a$ and $b$ are in the same subset $S_i$.

This is called an **Equivalence Relation** and the subsets $S_i$ are called **Equivalence Classes**.

The equivalence relation has three properties:

1. Reflexivity: $a \sim a$
2. Symmetry: $a \sim b \Rightarrow b \sim a$.
3. Transitivity: $a \sim b, \, b \sim c \Rightarrow a \sim c$.

There exists a map which does the following:

$$
S \mapsto \bar{S} = \{ \text{ equivalence classes in } S \}
$$

Which could also be described as:

$$
a \mapsto \bar{a} = \{ \text{the equivalence class containing } a \}
$$

(Assuming it's already partitioned)

Conversely, if we have a map $S \mapsto T$, this gives an equivalence relation (partition) on $S$:

$$
a \sim b \iff f(a) = f(b) \text{ in } T
$$

Example: \
The real line $S = \mathbb{R}$ maps to the complex circle with of norm $1$, aka $T = \mathbb{C}^1$ by the map $(x) = e^{2 \pi i x}$.

In this case, $f^{-1}(1) = \mathbb{Z}$, so the integers are an equivalence class.

The set of equivalence classes in this case is the interval $[0, 1]$, because every point on the circle is a point on the interval.

Notice that this is a homomorphism on groups, because $f$ maps $(\mathbb{R}, +) \mapsto (\mathbb{C}^1, \times)$, and we can see that $f(a + b) = f(a) \times f(b)$.

---

**Sidenote**:

Two properties of the exponential function are what make it amazing:

1. Being a homomorphism from the additive group of numbers to the multiplicative group of numbers. (as seen above)
2. Being a solution to $f'(x) = af(x)$.

Note that both the real line and the complex circle above aren't just sets, they have a topology to them. (You can talk about when two points are in $\epsilon$-neighborhood of each other)

You can see that this exponential mapping not only preserves group structure, it sends close points from the real line to close points on the circle. (aka preserves the topological structure)

This is called a **Homomorphism of Lie groups**.

The fact that the study of group homomorphisms in the context of continuous groups is infinitely related to the solution of differential equations. \
(look up the **Lie Group-Lie Algebra Correspondence**.)

---

Maps on sets are fairly complicated (?), so we'll look at maps on groups which are much nicer.

## Group Homomorphisms

Suppose $f: G \mapsto G'$ is a group homomorphism. 

Let $H \triangleleft G$ be the _kernel_ of $f$. \
Then we get an equivalence relation on $G$ where $H$ is one of the equivalence classes.

Namely, any time we have a group homomorphism $f$ on a group $G$, we get a partition of $G$ into pieces, and one of the pieces is the kernel of $f$.

Why? \
Because $H = f^{-1}(e') = \{ a \in G : f(a) = f(e) = e' \}$.

**Proposition**: \
The other equivalence classes have the form:

$$
a \cdot H = \{ a \cdot h : h \in H \} \quad \exists a \in G
$$

This is called a **left coset** of $H$ in $G$. \
(Because we multiplied $a$ on the left)

**Proof**: \
Say $f(a) = f(b) \in G'$, (i.e. $a \sim b$) \
Then

$$
\begin{align*} 
f(a^{-1} b) 
&= f(a^{-1}) f(b) \\
&= f(a)^{-1} f(b) \\
&= f(b)^{-1} f(b) \\
&= e'
\end{align*}
$$

Which would mean that $h = a^{-1}b \in H$, therefore $b = ah$.

So if I have an element _equivalent_ to $a$, it lies inside the $a \cdot H$ set. Conversely, if I have an element in $a \cdot H$, it's _equivalent_ to $a$. \
Because for all the elements in that set, $f(b) = f(a \cdot h) = f(a) \times f(h) = f(a) \times e' = f(a)$.

So the equivalence classes of homomorphisms of groups are precisely the different left cosets of the kernel.

[Stopped at 19:07 because I want to go to the gym.]