Functional Analysis is the realm of applying real and complex analysis to $\infty$-dimenstional linear algebera. It is a very broad field, and we will only be able to cover a small portion of it. Here are some of the topics in the field:

* Banach Spaces
* Hilbert Spaces
* Linear Operators
* Spectral Theory
* Distributions
* Sobolev Spaces

For example, here we consider spaces consisting of _functions_, or of _sequences_ or of _linear maps_ between two spaces. Functional analysis is sometimes called the _Study of topological-algebraic structures_. (We'll get there to what that means.)

Let's start with some definitions.

## Metric Spaces
A metric space is a set of points $X$. If we only consider this set of points, the only statement we can make about them is whether or not any two of them are equal. Now we want to give it more structure: meaning that we want to know what the _distance_ between any two points is. \
So we define a _metric_ called the _distance function_ $d$ that takes two points $x, y \in X$ and returns a non-negative real number. 

$$d: X \times X \rightarrow \mathbb{R^{\times}}$$ 

This metric should satisfy the following properties:
1. The distance between two points should be non-negative. $d(x, y) \geq 0$. Note that $d(x, y) = 0 \iff x = y$   
2. The distance between two points should be symmetric. $d(x, y) = d(y, x)$ 
3. And finally, the distance between two points should satisfy the triangle inequality. $\forall z \in X \, ; \, d(x, y) \leq d(x, z) + d(z, y)$
   
Here are some examples of metric spaces:

1. $X = \mathbb{C}$ and $d(x, y) = |x - y|$
2. The Euclidean metric: $X = \mathbb{R}^{n}$ and $d(x, y) = \sqrt{\sum_{i=1}^{n} (x_{i} - y_{i})^{2}}$
3. $X = \mathbb{R}^{n}$ and $d(x, y) = max \{ |x_{i} - y_{i}| \}$
4. The discrete metric: $X =$ any set $\neq \empty$ and $d(x, y) = \begin{cases} 0 & x = y \\ 1 & x \neq y \end{cases}$ 

The first two properties of the distance function should be pretty easy to verify. The only tricky one is the triangle inequality. 