For a fixed point $x_0 \in X$, we want to talk about the set of all the points that have the same distance from the fixed point. \
In $\mathbb{R}^2$, this is a circle. \
In $\mathbb{R}^3$, this is a sphere. \
In $\mathbb{R}^n$, this is a hypersphere. \
In Euclidean geometry, we call this set of points the **sphere** or **ball** of radius $r$ centered at $x_0$ and denote it by $S(x_0, r)$.

Now, we want to generalize this concept to an abstract metric space $(X, d)$. \

We define the **open $\epsilon$-ball** around $x_0$ as the set of all points in $X$ that are within a distance of $\epsilon$ from $x_0$:

$$
B_{\epsilon}(x_0) = \{x \in X \mid d(x, x_0) < \epsilon\}
$$

Note that for a fixed $\epsilon$, $B_{\epsilon}(x_0)$ is a subset of $X$ ans is never empty, because $x_0 \in B_{\epsilon}(x_0)$.

Now, using this notion of an open ball we can talk about many important notions in a metric space.

## Open Sets

For a metric space $(X, d)$, a subset $A \subseteq X$ is called **open** if for every $x \in A$, there exists an $\epsilon > 0$ such that $B_{\epsilon}(x) \subseteq A$. \
(We can make $\epsilon$ as small as we want, but it should be greater than $0$.)

Openness here means that for a fixed point inside the set, you can always find a ball around it that is completely contained in the set.

Now, before moving on to closed sets, let's look at something called the boundary of a set.

Note that the intersection of two open sets is also an open set. (Because for every point in the intersection, you can find a ball around it that is contained in both sets.)

## Boundary of a Set

For a subset $A \subseteq X$, the **boundary** of $A$ is the set of all points whose open $\epsilon$-balls intersect both $A$ and $A^c$ for every $\epsilon > 0$. \
i.e. A point $x$ is a boundary point of a subspace $S$ if every open set containing $x$ intersects both $S$ and the complement of $S$.

$$
\begin{align*} 
&B_{\epsilon}(x) \cap A \neq \emptyset \quad \text{ and } \\ 
&B_{\epsilon}(x) \cap A^c \neq \emptyset
\end{align*}
$$

Where $A^c = X \setminus A$ is the complement of $A$.

There is a symbol to denote all the boundary points of a set $A$, which is $\partial A$.

$$
\partial A = \{x \in X \mid B_{\epsilon}(x) \cap A \neq \emptyset \text{ and } B_{\epsilon}(x) \cap A^c \neq \emptyset : \forall \epsilon > 0\}
$$

Note that $\partial A = \partial A^c$.

So let's define an open set in terms of the boundary of a set.

$$
A \text{ is open} \iff \partial A \cap A = \emptyset
$$

For example, in $\mathbb{R}$, the boundary of the open set (interval) $(0, 1)$ is $\{0, 1\}$, which is not contained in $(0, 1)$.

## Closed Sets

Therefore, we can similarly define a **closed set**.

Again, for a subset $A \subseteq X$:

$$
A \text{ is closed} \iff \partial A \cup A = A
$$

Because the boundary points of $A$ and $A^c$ are the same, we can also define a closed set as:

$$
A \text{ is closed} \iff A^c \text{ is open}
$$

## Closure of a Set

We define the closure of a subset $A \subseteq X$ as the union of $A$ and its boundary.

$$
\overline{A} = A \cup \partial A
$$

Remember that this always defines a closed set, and it is the smallest closed set containing $A$.

## Interior of a Set

The **interior** of a subset $A \subseteq X$ is the largest open set contained in $A$.

$$
Int(A) = A^{\circ} = \bigcup_{U \subseteq A, U \text{ is open}} U
$$

I believe you could define the interior of a set as the set of all the points that are not boundary points of the set.

$$
A^{\circ} = A \setminus \partial A
$$

## Clopen Sets

A set $A$ is called **clopen** if it is both open and closed.

For example, for a topological space $(X, \tau)$, the empty set $\emptyset$ and the whole space $X$ are always clopen.

Why is the empty set clopen? \
Because the boundary of the empty set is empty, and the empty set is open.

Why is the whole space $X$ clopen? \
Because the boundary of the whole space is empty, and the whole space is closed. \
There are no points outside the entire space, there are no points that can be approached from both inside and outside the space. 

Now consider the space $X$ which consists of the union of the two open intervals $(1, 2)$ and $(3, 4)$ of $\mathbb{R}$. \
In the discrete topology, every subset is open (by definition). Since the complement of any subset is also a subset, it follows that every subset is closed as well. (Both itself open and compliment open) Thus, every subset in a discrete topology is clopen.

Let's look at discrete topology closer, via considering the metric space $(X, d)$ where $X := (1, 3] \cup (4, 5)$ and $d(x, y) = |x - y|$.

For the subspace $A := (1, 3]$ of this space, we want to see if $A$ is open or closed. \
In this order, we check to see if every point in $A$ has an open ball around it that is contained in $A$. 

$$
\begin{cases}
    x \in A \setminus \{ 3 \} ; \text{ define } \epsilon := \frac{1}{2} min(|1-x|, |3-x|)  \implies B_{\epsilon}(x) \subseteq A \\
    x = 3 ; B_{1}(x) = \{ y \in X \mid d(x, y) < 1 \} = (2, 3] \subseteq A
\end{cases}
$$

Which means that $A$ is open. \
Note that this is only possible because $(3, 4]$ is not in $X$.

Now, this $A$ is also closed, because the boundary of $A$ is empty. (Because no point beyond $3$ from the right and $1$ from the left is in $X$.)

Therefore $A$ is clopen.

Finally, considering another subspace $C := [1, 2]$, we can see that $\partial C = \{ 2 \}$, and $\overline{C} = C$.